add ironic-image branching and releasing procedure (#435)
metal3-io/ironic-image: docs/releasing.md

# Releasing ironic-image

This document explains how to prepare and publish a release for ironic-image, and
how often a new release branch is created.

**NOTE**: Always follow
[release documentation from the main branch](https://github.com/metal3-io/ironic-image/blob/main/docs/releasing.md).
Release documentation in release branches may be outdated.

> ## Before making a release

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Pre-release actions
```

Things you should check before making a release:

- Check the
  [Metal3 release process](https://github.com/metal3-io/metal3-docs/blob/main/processes/releasing.md)
  for high-level process and possible follow-up actions

> - Verify the latest bgufix branches in ironic and ironic-inspector upstream repositories;

Reviewer 2: typo

- Verify compatibility with latest sushy and ironic-lib upstream releases or master
  branches based on ironic and ironic-inspector bugfix requirements and constraints
- Verify openstack upper-constraints compatibility with ironic and ironic-inspector
  bugfix branches
- Verify any other direct or indirect dependency is uplifted to close any public
  vulnerabilities

  ## Permissions

Creating a release requires repository `write` permissions for:

- Tag pushing
- Branch creation
- GitHub Release publishing

These permissions are implicit for the org admins and repository admins.

> Release team member gets his/her permissions via `metal3-release-team`

Reviewer 2: "A release team member"?

membership. This GitHub team has the required permissions in each repository

> required to release CAPM3. Adding person to the team gives him/her the necessary

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
required to release CAPM3. Adding person to the team provides the necessary
```
Just to make sure we don't exclude anyone.

rights  in all relevant repositories in the organization. Individual persons
should not be given permissions directly.

## Process

ironic-image uses [semantic versioning](https://semver.org). For version `vX.x.y`:

### Repository setup

Clone the repository:
`git clone git@github.com:metal3-io/ironic-image`

or if using existing repository, verify your intended remote is set to
`metal3-io`: `git remote -v`. For this document, we assume it is `origin`.

- If creating a new release branch, identify the commit you wish to create the
  branch from, and create a branch `release-X.x` where `X.x` corresponds to the

>   ironic upstream bugfix version, for example for `bugfix-22.1` it's `release-22.1`:

Reviewer 4: nit: depending on the exact moment, it can also be a stable branch

Reviewer 4: I suggest we don't do things like `release-<codename>` in this case and keep the number (corresponding to Ironic's release number)

## Post-release actions for new release branches

Some post-release actions are needed when a new release branch is created.

### Branch protection rules

Branch protection rules need to be applied to the new release branch. Copy the
settings after the previous release branch, with the exception of
`Required tests` selection. Required tests can only be selected after new
keywords are implemented in Jenkins JJB, and project-infra, and have been run at
least once in the PR targeting the branch in question.

### Update README.md and build badges

Update `README.md` with release specific information, both on `main` and in the
new `release-X.x` branch as necessary.

<!-- No example PR yet. To be added when first release from branch is made -->

In the `release-X.x` branch, update the build badges in the `README.md` to point
to correct Jenkins jobs, so the build statuses of the release branch are
visible.

<!-- No example PR yet. To be added when first release from branch is made -->

## Additional actions outside this repository

Further additional actions may be required in the Metal3 project after
ironic-image release.
For that, please continue following the instructions provided in

> [Metal3 release process](https://github.com/metal3-io/metal3-docs/blob/main/processes/releasing.md)

Reviewer 4: I don't think sushy-tools/vbmc should be versioned together with Ironic, we expect them to work with any versions. Not sure about MariaDB either, but I can live with that/

> [Metal3 release process](https://github.com/metal3-io/metal3-docs/blob/main/processes/releasing.md)

Reviewer 4: ipa-downloader is also interesting since right now it always downloads IPA master. So it makes little sense to version or even release it. We should fix that though.

> [Metal3 release process](https://github.com/metal3-io/metal3-docs/blob/main/processes/releasing.md)

Author: During the weekly meeting discussion we've decided to leave things as they are at the moment, it may makes sense for ipa-downloader to be versioned though.
We have the capability to build the ipa ramdisk in metal3 directly, which will help if we decide to do that.

> [Metal3 release process](https://github.com/metal3-io/metal3-docs/blob/main/processes/releasing.md)

Reviewer 4: Let's write it somewhere that we will use master IPA for now with a goal of moving towards custom builds eventually?

> [Metal3 release process](https://github.com/metal3-io/metal3-docs/blob/main/processes/releasing.md)

Author: I've added another paragraph below

# Releasing ironic-image

This document explains how to prepare and publish a release for ironic-image, and

> how often a new release branch is created.

Reviewer 4: The "How often" part could use move love. The way I read the document, we should aim for a release shortly after a corresponding Ironic stable or bugfix branch is created, otherwise the newly created ironic-image branch will effectively go back in time once you pin the projects.

Author: I've added some words in the Branches lifecycle paragraph

**NOTE**: Always follow
[release documentation from the main branch](https://github.com/metal3-io/ironic-image/blob/main/docs/releasing.md).
Release documentation in release branches may be outdated.

## Pre-release actions

Things you should check before making a release:

- Check the
  [Metal3 release process](https://github.com/metal3-io/metal3-docs/blob/main/processes/releasing.md)
  for high-level process and possible follow-up actions
- Verify the latest bugfix or stable branches (which is the most recent) in ironic
  and ironic-inspector upstream repositories;
- Verify compatibility with latest sushy and ironic-lib upstream releases or master
  branches based on ironic and ironic-inspector bugfix or stable requirements
  and constraints
- Verify openstack upper-constraints compatibility with ironic and ironic-inspector
  bugfix or stable branches
- Verify any other direct or indirect dependency is uplifted to close any public
  vulnerabilities

>   ## Permissions

Reviewer 4: Weird indentation here, did you mean to use ###?

Creating a release requires repository `write` permissions for:

- Tag pushing
- Branch creation
- GitHub Release publishing

These permissions are implicit for the org admins and repository admins.
A release team member gets permissions via `metal3-release-team`
membership. This GitHub team has the required permissions in each repository
to make a release. Adding person to the team provides the necessary
rights  in all relevant repositories in the organization. Individual persons
should not be given permissions directly.

## Process

> ironic-image uses [semantic versioning](https://semver.org). For version `vX.x.y`:

Reviewer 5: Why `vX.x.y`? Semver is specific of the format being `vX.Y.Z`

### Repository setup

Clone the repository:
`git clone git@github.com:metal3-io/ironic-image`

or if using existing repository, verify your intended remote is set to
`metal3-io`: `git remote -v`. For this document, we assume it is `origin`.

- If creating a new release branch, identify the commit you wish to create the

>   branch from, and create a branch `release-X.x` where `X.x` corresponds to the

Reviewer 5: Same for all references of `X.x`  -> `X.Y`

  ironic upstream release version, for example for `ironic 22.1` it's `release-22.1`:
  `git checkout <sha> -b release-X.x` and push it to remote:
  `git push origin release-X.x` to create it
- If creating a new patch release, use existing branch `release-X.x`:
  `git checkout origin/release-X.x`

> - In the newly created release branch:

Reviewer 5: This is a bit problematic timing wise, since we need to add CI support for the newly created branch before you can merge PRs to it. All of the other repos do the uplifts etc in main first, and then branch out.

Author: main does not need to have an upper-constraints file
Also I think setting up CI first is not a problem, we'll wait for that to be up and then update upper-constraints
I'll specify it in this proposal

Reviewer 5: I know, hence mentioned the way its done elsewhere is problematic. Docs update is all I wanted, thanks for fixing.

   - Add a copy of upper-constraints.txt from [Openstack Requirements](https://opendev.org/openstack/requirements)

>      to replace the placeholder

Reviewer 4: A few more words here probably? Like, if we pin ironic to a stable branch, the requirements should also come from the same stable branch. For bugfix branches... just whatever the current version is?

>    - Pin ironic and ironic-inspector to match the corresponding bugfix or

Reviewer 6: Ironic only tests upgrades to/from major 6 month releases. In addition, the stable 6 month releases are supported for a long life cycle -- guaranteed for 18 months -- where bugfix branches have a much shorter lifecycle.

Additionally, there is minimal value in metal3 using Ironic bugfix branches as it's relatively rare that Ironic has a new feature that metal3 immediately consumes. 

What is the primary driver behind tracking bugfix releases in Ironic?

Author: @jayofdoom thanks for the comment!
we're not going to always tie the release/branch of the ironic-image to bugfix branches, we'll use either bugffix or stable based on which is the closest one as a general tule of thumb
the main reason why we can use the bugfix branches, considering their short life, is that the release/branches of the ironic-image will also be supported for no longer than 6 months, except very special cases
we aim to branch 3-4 times a year, meaning every 3-4 months (shorter than lifetime of a bugfix branch), and release maybe even more often

Reviewer 4: > it's relatively rare that Ironic has a new feature that metal3 immediately consumes.

This is not quite true, by the way. We have several features developed specifically for Metal3 consumption. This includes JSON RPC or all-in-one Ironic executable in the past, firmware upgrades and non-bootable ISO presently.

Reviewer 6: Ack. I think part of why this isn't ideal is that bugfix releases are not handled entirely via automation on the Ironic side, so it makes me nervous to have another OSS downstream consumer of it -- but frankly, you both know I've felt that way about them since the beginning.

Reviewer 4: To close the loop here: Riccardo is looking into improving the automation.

     stable branches
   - If needed, pin versions of ironic-lib and sushy to grant compatibility with
     ironic and ironic-inspector; this can probably be avoided considering that

>      we're using upper-constraints

Reviewer 4: Yes, this point can be removed for this specific reason.

### Tags

First we create a primary release tag, that triggers release note creation and
image building processes.

> - Create a signed, annotated tag with: `git tag -s -a vX.x.y -m vX.x.y`

Reviewer 5: Same as before

- Push the tags to the GitHub repository: `git push origin vX.Y.Z`

TODO(elfosardo): we should probably create an automated workflow with github
actions as it's been done for other repositories like BMO

### Release artifacts

NOTE(elfosardo): TODO once we have an automated workflow

### Release notes

Next step is to clean up the release note manually.

- Check for duplicates, reverts, and incorrect classifications of PRs, and
  whatever release creation tagged to be manually checked.
- For any superseded PRs (like same dependency uplifted multiple times, or
  commit revertions) that provide no value to the release, move them to
  Superseded section. This way the changes are acknowledged to be part of the
  release, but not overwhelming the important changes contained by the release.
- If the release you're making is not a new major release, new minor release, or
  a new patch release from the latest release branch, uncheck the box for latest
  release.

> - If it is a release candidate (RC) or a pre-release, tick pre-release box.

Reviewer 4: We're not going to have pre-releases here, are we?

- Publish the release.

## Post-release actions for new release branches

Some post-release actions are needed when a new release branch is created.

### Branch protection rules

Branch protection rules need to be applied to the new release branch. Copy the
settings after the previous release branch, with the exception of
`Required tests` selection. Required tests can only be selected after new
keywords are implemented in Jenkins JJB, and project-infra, and have been run at
least once in the PR targeting the branch in question.

### Update README.md and build badges

Update `README.md` with release specific information, both on `main` and in the

> new `release-X.x` branch as necessary.

Reviewer 5: Same as before

<!-- No example PR yet. To be added when first release from branch is made -->

In the `release-X.x` branch, update the build badges in the `README.md` to point
to correct Jenkins jobs, so the build statuses of the release branch are
visible.

<!-- No example PR yet. To be added when first release from branch is made -->

> ### Branches lifecycle

Reviewer 5: This section should probably be elsewhere, like `CONTRIBUTING.md`, like it is in CAPM3, IPAM and BMO.

Author: I can move it, but honestly it does make sense to me to keep it here since it's the main place where we talk about branches and release strategy

Reviewer 5: Sure, no strong opinion. We can always move later if feeling like it.
